# The OSRM Build Process Explained

>[!TIP]
> To learn more about the build process, start with studying these files:
>
> - `/CMakeLists.txt`
> - `/conanfile.py`
> - `.github/workflows/osrm-backend.yml`
> - all files under `.github/actions`
> - `scripts/ci/decode_matrix.py`

## The Complication

The build must work with most of these combinations:

| Location   | OS        | Deps      | Builder   | Compiler   | Linker   | Type      |
| ---------- | --------- | --------- | --------- | ---------- | -------- | --------- |
| home       | Linux     | Conan     | Make      | clang      | static   | Release   |
| github     | macOS     | apt-get   | Ninja     | gcc        | shared   | Debug     |
|            | Windows   |           | MSBuild   | msvc       |          |           |

### Communication between build stages

The `build` directory is a hardcoded 'well-known'
location. The `build` directory is used for communication
between the stages of the build toolchain even if the actual build of
the binaries should take place in `build/Release`,
`build/Debug`, or elsewhere. As the build progresses, more
and more information becomes available in `build/`.

| Program            | produces             | and                            |
| ------------------ | -------------------- | ------------------------------ |
| `decode_matrix.py` | `build/matrix.env`   | `/CMakePresets.json`           |
| `conan install`    | `build/conan.env`    | `generators/CMakePresets.json` |
| `cmake -B`         | `build/osrm-run.env` | `build/osrm-run-env.sh`        |

The `.env` files only contain `KEY=VALUE` pairs, so that they can be safely sourced into
a shell, or piped into `$GITHUB_ENV`. `CMakePresets.json` files are consumed by `cmake`
(and also by `conan`). The scripts `build/osrm-run-env.sh` is a convenient way to source
the whole environment in one step.

There is a gotcha: if the `file.env` file contains a `KEY="Value with spaces"` pair
(note the quotes), `source file.env` *will* remove those quotes but
`cat file.env >> $GITHUB_ENV` *will not* remove those quotes.

#### build/matrix.env

This file will exist only on github. It contains all information extracted from the
github matrix. Its main use is for piping into `$GITHUB_ENV` to make the environment
available to the following job steps.

#### build/conan.env

This file is generated by Conan during the install stage. Use it if you want to do a
`conan install ...` and then switch to using `cmake ...`.

Environment Variable            | Description
------------------------------- | -----------------------------------------------------
`CMAKE_CONFIGURE_PRESET_NAME`   | The preset `cmake` should use for configure.
`CMAKE_BUILD_PRESET_NAME`       | The preset `cmake --build` should use.
`CMAKE_TEST_PRESET_NAME`        | The preset `ctest` should use.
`CONAN_GENERATORS_DIR`          | Where `CMakePresets.json` is emitted. (for debugging)
`OSRM_CONFIG`                   | The chosen config: `Release` or `Debug`

#### build/conan-run-env.sh

This file is generated by Conan during the install stage. Source it to obtain the paths
to all libraries provided by Conan.

Environment Variable  | Description
--------------------- | -----------------------------------------------------
`LD_LIBRARY_PATH`     | The path to the libraries built by Conan. (Linux)
`DYLD_LIBRARY_PATH`   | The path to the libraries built by Conan. (macOS)
`PATH`                | The path to the libraries built by Conan. (Windows)

#### build/osrm-run.env

This file is generated by `cmake` during the configure
stage.

Environment Variable        | Description
--------------------------- | ----------------------------------------------------------
`OSRM_BUILD_DIR`            | The directory where the OSRM binaries will be built.
`OSRM_UNIT_TESTS_BUILD_DIR` | The directory where the unit tests will be built.
`OSRM_BENCHMARKS_BUILD_DIR` | The directory where the benchmarks will be built.
`OSRM_NODEJS_BUILD_DIR`     | The directory where the node bindings will be built.
`OSRM_NODEJS_INSTALL_DIR`   | The directory where the node bindings will be installed.
`OSRM_TEST_DATA_DIR`        | The directory containing the curated test data.

Note: multi-config generators (like Visual Studio or Xcode) generate the artifacts in a
`Release` or `Debug` subdirectory of the `build` directory. The `OSRM_*_BUILD_DIR`
variables always include these subdirectories and point to the location of the files.

#### build/osrm-run-env.sh

The file `build/osrm-run-env.sh` can be sourced to setup a runtime environment for the
built binaries. It sources all of the files mentioned above and exports their variables.
